A commonly used alternative velocity profile looks like this.
We accelerate. We move at constant velocity for as long as we need to
and then we slow down as quickly as we can.
An advantage of a trajectory like this is
that we get to our destination much more quickly.
The area under the two curves is the distance
travelled, and that's the same in the two
cases. It’s just that the red curve is much
more compact. It only takes 35 time units
instead of 50 time units.
This kind of motion is referred to as a trapezoidal
profile. It's named after the shape of the
velocity profile. It’s a trapezoid. It comprises
an acceleration phase, a coasting phase - where
we move at a constant velocity - and then a
deceleration phase. During acceleration and
deceleration, the velocity is a linear function
of time. Which means, that position is a parabolic
function of time. During the coasting phase,
the velocity is constant. That means that
the position profile is a straight line. So,
this kind of motion profile, the trapezoidal
profile, is also sometimes referred to as
a linear segment with parabolic blend. In
that robotics toolbox, it's the function LSPB
which is a contraction of a linear segment
with parabolic blend.
A disadvantage of the trapezoidal profile
is that acceleration is not continuous and
you can see it when we change from acceleration
phase to coasting phase and coasting to deceleration
phase, there is a step discontinuity in acceleration.
This is potentially problematic for some robots
but in general, we rely on the fact that the
bandwidth of the motion control systems is
relatively low and it smooths out this discontinuity
in acceleration.
Let's look at this type of trajectory using
the MATLAB tools, I am going to create a trapezoidal
trajectory using the MATLAB function LSPB
which is an acronym for Linear Segment with
Parabolic Blend. It's going to start with
the value of zero. It's going to finish at
one. We're going to do it in 50 times steps.
And, here we see the trajectory. We can clearly
see that the velocity profile is trapezoidal.
We can see the acceleration phase, the constant
velocity phase and the deceleration phase.
And, these different phases are color coded
in the plot of S versus time step. I can change
the trajectory. So, instead of going from
zero to one, it goes from zero to minus one.
And, the trajectory now looks like this. So,
then, I can ask for the values of S, from
zero to one in 50 times steps. And it creates
a vector in the workspace code S which has
50 rows. Each row corresponds to a time step.
And just like the tpoly function, I can also
ask for the velocity and the acceleration
which in turn, we put into the workspace SD
and STD and here they are also in the workspace
as 50 element vectors, one row per time step.
I'm going to return to my first example. A
trajectory from zero to one. We can see that
the velocity of the linear segment is a little
bit above 0.03. What we are going to do now
is to override the automatic choice of the
velocity of the linear segment. And, I'm going
to suggest that it use a value of 0.025 instead.
And, here we can see the trajectory is being
computed. You see that the linear segment
now is much longer and the parabolic blends
are much shorter. I am going to suggest that
it uses a slightly larger value of velocity
for the linear segment. And, now we can see
linear segment's quite short and the parabolic
blends are longer. The range of feasible values
for the velocity of the linear segment are
actually quite limited. And, if I suggest
a value of 0.02, it is returning an error indicating
that the velocity that I specified is too
small. It's not possible to compute a trapezoidal
profile with that value of velocity for the
linear segment.